Michael Franz: Everybody I'm back didn't actually go anywhere. You've probably been doing a few things since the last time you listen to me, but I still here. So,
Michael Franz: I am want to spend a second lecture today talking about
Michael Franz: A bit more of the what I might call the normative or at least more value based considerations of campaign finance and so
Michael Franz: Why don't we jump right in.
Michael Franz: I'm going to show you my PowerPoint.
Michael Franz: Which I have more information on the last time you were listening. I was sort of making the argument that I think candidate fundraising and
Michael Franz: Party fundraising is generally well regulated in a way that even though there are lots of ways for money to get into the system.
Michael Franz: By and large, there is a pretty good limits as explained. Whoops. Pretty good limits.
Michael Franz: As explained on this slide on the fundraising that these candidates and party committees and packs traditional packs can do and that the bigger concern is super PACs and and dark money groups.
Michael Franz: So I want to contextualize that a little bit, because the the first part up here, this, this part up here right up here is is I think a really positive feature of our campaign financing system and it has compelled, I think some people to
Michael Franz: Get a little head out over their skis in this area. And so I just heard that song. My apologies, as I close my my email. Okay.
Michael Franz: So,
Michael Franz: The reason. And so let me go back. The reason is because if you focus too much on the top here.
Michael Franz: I think you you miss all the things that I expressed before that are concerned. So let me, let me explain what I mean this was this was an article written in 2003 by someone we know, Stephen silver hair. He wrote the piece about
Michael Franz: Issue positions of congressional candidates from last week. And so he wrote this article in 2003 with two other political economists call wiser so little money in US politics.
Michael Franz: And the argument generally was I'll show you there's a payoff graph that if you think about how big US economy is how important the federal government.
Michael Franz: You would think that there would be more investment in candidate elections because the stakes are so massive Democrats take over, they could change the direction the economy of Republicans take over, they could change the direction the economy.
Michael Franz: And tons of interests have a stake in whether or not the economy goes. Laughter. Those are the actions economic policy moves. Laughter moves right and so
Michael Franz: You just see a ton more money. And in fact, that you know election sometimes cost $10 billion across all campaigns and election cycle but
Michael Franz: We spend that much money on potato chips, every year, right. So this is pitons writes a small amount of money.
Michael Franz: And so that was the article and motivated things. So the big question that comes out of that kind of sort of counterintuitive statements you know well
Michael Franz: Why do we care about campaign financing and for that matter. Is there too much money in elections and then if we decide we want to really regulate this, on what basis can we regulate the system. What is the rationale regulating the system. So as the things I want to talk about
Michael Franz: But first, this is the graph that they produce. This was actually my attempt to replicate their graph. And so if you go and you find this article.
Michael Franz: You'll see that the graph looks a lot like this, they didn't give me the data I went out and tried to find the data using their sources and So bravo to them for well sourcing their data.
Michael Franz: Because I was able to replicate the graph almost perfectly, and it shows spending in presidential elections presidential candidates spending back to 1888
Michael Franz: All the way up to 2000s of articles written 2003. And so this takes us to 2000 and they don't just look at spending and then just sort of showing spending tools because spending total skyrocket over time.
Michael Franz: They don't show you inflation adjusted spending either, which is what the textbook shows inflation adjusted spending accounts with the changing value of the dollar, they're interested in scaling spending relative to the size of the economy. So economy is big and spending is big than
Michael Franz: Or spending is, you know, it gets bigger as the economy stays the same and spending will go up. But if the economy is getting bigger GDP is growing and spending is growing at the same rate.
Michael Franz: Then spending will stay will look like. It stays flat. So it's a similar to inflation adjustments, but it has to do with economics son size of the US economy as opposed to sort of the value of the dollar.
Michael Franz: And they they kind of baseline it all in 2016 of their time series. And so what they show is that actually if you look at the amount of money that congressional the presidential candidates spent in 1892 and 1896
Michael Franz: We take that dollar value and you make it relative to the size of the economy and that year.
Michael Franz: It was a lot of money, relative to the amount of money that candidates spend presidential candidates spend
Michael Franz: After 1936 after 1936 1932 in fact between 1948 and 2000, with the exception of maybe one presidential election, the amount of money that's spent by presidential candidates.
Michael Franz: relative to the size of the economy is very small in comparison to the amount of money that was spent in the early part of the 20th century.
Michael Franz: And really small in comparison to to the most expensive quote unquote sort of comparatively expensive elections in American history at 92 1996
Michael Franz: If you look at candidates spending. These are candidates congressional candidates of which we don't really have great data on until the 1970s and 1980s and traditional pack spending and you scale it relative to the size of the economy.
Michael Franz: It's pretty flat and some ups and some downs but it really hasn't grown over time pack contributions are pretty small compared to congressional candidate spending.
Michael Franz: And there are more congressional candidates and there are presidential candidates. So it's higher than presidential candidates spending, but it really hasn't grown between 1980 and 2000 this 20 year period.
Michael Franz: So they use this to argue that, well, there's not as much money as think elections and it's not getting bigger, but that was 2000. So the first thing I did.
Michael Franz: Was trying to extend their graph through 2016 so I don't have 2018 in here because when I was doing this. I was trying to extend it into
Michael Franz: 2016 because I was writing about this and in 2018. And so if you do that, you get this, which is not altogether that much difference congressional candidate spending is maybe if you look kind of close, you might think that this is trending up a little bit.
Michael Franz: And but it's still not very large pack contribution spending is consistently flat and after 2000 we get into
Michael Franz: That's when the public financing system for presidential elections for fell apart. And so you start to see more money in presidential elections 2008 was the most money spent by
Michael Franz: The two major candidates relative to the size of the economy, you have to go all the way back to 1932 to get another election that's more expensive in terms of candidate spending, but it's still pretty low. And it's a lot lower than 1896 record and so
Michael Franz: The story is roughly the same more candidate spending by a presidential candidates, but not a lot. So, oh wow elections aren't getting more expensive, right, that might be
Michael Franz: The interpretation you withdraw from the graph, but this is you know basically looking only at the top part of the slide I had earlier.
Michael Franz: Which is, and I'll just go back to, as you can see it candidate fundraising parties are not even actually included in these totals.
Michael Franz: And traditional patterns. So it's just packs and Canvas doesn't count parties which spend a lot of money and it doesn't count. Super PACs and dark money groups which weren't very active prior to
Michael Franz: The, the early 2000s, but it became much more. So I thought, well, okay, there's a lot of things that's left out of this graph. What's left out of the graph.
Michael Franz: Some of the things I mentioned party spending what's left out of the graph primary candidate spending. This is just general election congressional candidates general election presidential
Michael Franz: Super PACs spending dark money spending. What else is left don't party convention spending.
Michael Franz: A lot of things that have that are important dollar spent in a campaign that are not accounted for in the totals in this graph.
Michael Franz: So what if you included that what we don't have them all the way back to eating, eating eight. In fact, the best we can do is probably back to about 819 80 but that's still 40 years roughly almost 40 years 36 years in this graph data. And what does it tell us
Michael Franz: Well, it tells us that presidential elections and midterm congressional elections are becoming more expensive. Now remember, these are scaled to the size of the economy. So as the economy is growing.
Michael Franz: So his campaign spending, but these graphs these lines, tell us the campaign spending by in presidential elections and campaign spinning and midterm elections.
Michael Franz: Is growing faster than the economy is growing because if the economy was growing at the same rate as campaigns were spending money more than it would it would look flat because the share of GP would be the same.
Michael Franz: But spending is growing above and beyond economic growth and so campaigns are becoming way more expensive.
Michael Franz: They're becoming more expensive because there's a lot of outside spending because there's a lot of party spending and and we see a lot more, you know. Primary candidates than perhaps we used to and concoct all of that into the total
Michael Franz: And you combine it all. You see a growth and spending. That's pretty dramatic. In fact, between 1992 if you go back, I think, to 1992 here in this graph, we can actually do
Michael Franz: I should say we don't go back to 1980 in this graph because I'm trying to keep it directly comparable and I have all the data that I mentioned to you. Going back to 1992
Michael Franz: You see here that the growth rate up to 2016 is about relative about a 50% growth in spending. And over here you see from
Michael Franz: 1200 on the Y axis of the past 24 you see a double doubling of spending. So the growth rate and presidential elections is about 50% overnights 92 it's about
Michael Franz: 100% over 1982 in mid term spending the short of it is elections are getting more expensive. Even when you scale it to the size of the economy.
Michael Franz: Now, why, why is that happening. Well one reason is parties which are spending more money and finding creative ways to get more money into the system.
Michael Franz: They're limited in what they can fundraise but their limits are much bigger as an engineer, so they're spending money, but the primary reason, in my opinion, is outside groups.
Michael Franz: And so this is a graph that looks at political advertising on TV and it says, we only can go back to 2000 here, but we can take it almost 20 years forward of all the ads on TV.
Michael Franz: In a presidential midterm cycle.
Michael Franz: What percentage of them are sponsored not by candidates and not by parties, but by outside groups like super PACs and dark many groups.
Michael Franz: And since the Citizens United decision in 2010 which the book discusses outside groups are almost 30% of all the ads on TV 30% of all the ads on TV.
Michael Franz: That's a lot of spending by outside groups and they spent a lot of money on TV ads and so they are increasing the cost of campaigns.
Michael Franz: By the virtue of their aggressive efforts in elections. I think that's one of the primary reasons why campaign spending has gone up party spending more which is not reflected in this graph and outside groups really spending a ton of money.
Michael Franz: You also see the profile of the type of groups that are advertising changing as the laws change. And so this shows us the four different types of groups that are most common 520 seventh we're briefly important is the book mentions in 2004 they become much less than point
Michael Franz: Five or one sees or the dark money groups. So you can see that they've always been around and they always spend a fair amount of money packs or the traditional packs.
Michael Franz: These are on TV ads is spending on TV ads and then the oranges and super PACs and so super PACs are hugely important to contemporary current nerd elections. This is, of all the ads spent by outside groups.
Michael Franz: What share constitutes these different types so super PACs where you know over 60% of the ads sponsored in 2018 501 C nonprofits are nonprofit dark money groups for basically the rest, except for a little bit of traditional pack spending.
Michael Franz: And that's basically what we've seen since 2012 nonprofit dark many groups and super PACs doing all of the outside group spending.
Michael Franz: Less traditional packs, they just do generally contributions to candidates and a smaller share of dark many groups as super PACs will become the genre of choice, if you will. So I think that the the profile of who's spending a campaigns has really
Michael Franz: Really changed how much of campaigns, of course, because these groups are spending tons and tons of money in competitive House and Senate races and in the presidential race.
Michael Franz: So if we wanted to change the system.
Michael Franz: On what basis would, we would we do that, what is the rationale for reforming our campaign planning system.
Michael Franz: And I would argue that if you want to change it.
Michael Franz: You might want to change the contribution list for candidates, you might want to try to button down and control the spending by outside groups, you might want to lower contribution limits for parties, you might want to do a variety of different things.
Michael Franz: You might want to make dark money more transparent.
Michael Franz: But there are three main rationales for reform. So if you're a reformer, someone who thinks we should reform the system in one way or the other.
Michael Franz: You might pick one of these as your sort of vehicle for your arguments.
Michael Franz: The first is a free speech trashing the Free Speech rationale is really the one used by people who argue for deregulating the campaign finance system.
Michael Franz: If you want to deregulate the campaign finance and you don't want. We don't. You don't care that there's a lot of money in elections, it could be because you're a a strong free speech advocate and you might believe
Michael Franz: And you probably do believe if you're in this camp that spending money is a form of expression and therefore the First Amendment protects
Michael Franz: You from limits on that. So if, if I think expressing myself with a donation to a candidate is a form of speech then limiting how much money I can give to that candidate is a restriction on the speech.
Michael Franz: And therefore, as a free speech advocate, I might be opposed to campaign contribution limits.
Michael Franz: Free speech advocates are about generally for for for deregulation because they see money as equivalent to speech and spending money as a public speaking.
Michael Franz: And therefore, the First Amendment dictates how those limits are unconstitutional, not everyone agrees with that though, and some people are in the camp of anti corruption.
Michael Franz: Which is that we limit how much money is being spent in elections in order to prevent corrupt influence of wealthy donors.
Michael Franz: We already prevent the corrupt influence of wealthy donors, perhaps with limits on contributions to candidates and parties.
Michael Franz: But what about the wealthy donors that are giving to the super PACs in the dark money groups.
Michael Franz: They might end up getting a lot of influence. If campaigns know that those wealthy donors are spending money.
Michael Franz: To bankroll those groups and those groups help you win reelection by airing a ton of ads and a competitive race.
Michael Franz: Well then, when you go back to Washington Cermak policy and the big super PAC donor shows up in your office and says, look at all that money. I gave you the super PAC.
Michael Franz: You know it'd be really great if you could get me this tax loophole.
Michael Franz: That's a concern for people who think that money can have a corrupting influence like that. So if you're an anti corruption advocate, you might say we put limits on these things, even though there are limits on expression because we're worried about the corrupt relationship between
Michael Franz: Investors and recipients
Michael Franz: Or you could be a political equality advocate, which is similar in a corruption, but it's much more focused on the idea that the wealthy have too much influence, maybe not corrupt influence but the average American has almost none.
Michael Franz: And if we really care about the one person, one vote standard, we should make it harder for wealthy individuals to essentially vote with their dollars right to get more influence, even if it's not corrupt.
Michael Franz: It's corrupt to show up and say give me this tax and it's not corrupt to show up to an office and say, Could I have 10 minutes to talk about my favorite policy.
Michael Franz: And it's not corrupt for a candidate to say yes. More often to wealthy donors than to regular citizens.
Michael Franz: It's not, that's not corrupt it's corrupt potential, but it's not equal some perhaps unfair. So if you're a political equality advocate.
Michael Franz: You might say the average citizen should be able to have as much influence and should have the year of the incumbent
Michael Franz: As much as the wealthy citizen. And so in order to prevent inequality in that we should limit how much is being spent in campaigns or we should give citizens more opportunities to influence policymakers.
Michael Franz: And so each of those different rationales has some basis for which you would advocate for different reforms.
Michael Franz: Free speech advocate is about, you know, getting rid of restrictions and then a corruption advocate is really about limiting how much donors can influence policy making and in a political equality advocate is more interested in lifting up the influence of regular citizens.
Michael Franz: All those are legit rationales the issue, however, as I see it often is that the First Amendment is really
Michael Franz: The only place in the Constitution, where any of these rationales has some constitutional Foundation, the First Amendment protects speech.
Michael Franz: There is no anti corruption amendment to the Constitution and there. There is a political equality AMENDMENT AND THE 14th AMENDMENT, but that's generally been operationalize to protect different racial ethnic
Michael Franz: engender groups from unequal discrimination, it's usually not interpretive it's never been interpreted by the court to protect poor people or regular folk from the influence of of wealthy individuals.
Michael Franz: The 14th amendment has never been really used to argue that wealthy individuals are treated more equal treated better
Michael Franz: And that poor individuals are unequal in political influence that's never been used before the 42 minutes never been used for that purpose. It's more of a civil rights purpose.
Michael Franz: So the First Amendment free speech is really the only place in the Constitution.
Michael Franz: That has some connection to these rationales which means that the free speech advocates have a bit of an advantage here.
Michael Franz: Because if they can argue that money and then the donation of money and the use of money is expressive, then it's really hard to figure out how to get around the fact that the Constitution does not allow Congress to limit that
Michael Franz: Anti corruption political quality folks can make constitutional arguments, but they have to look in different places the Constitution's not as clearly articulated
Michael Franz: Where they have their constitutional foundation so
Michael Franz: I would say we can't avoid the First Amendment. If we're reformers in anti corruption political equality realm and they have to figure out how how to still allow people to express themselves.
Michael Franz: Even if we're trying to limit how much money is being spent in elections. It's really tricky, tricky debate.
Michael Franz: Now there might be some consensus reforms that we could all agree on, although I don't even know if we can agree on anything anymore, as a country, but
Michael Franz: Maybe we could all agree on certain basic things that don't seem to violate our speech rights.
Michael Franz: And that do a little bit of work in preventing corruption and making things a bit more equal
Michael Franz: And that could be something like, well, maybe we could all agree we need more disclosure and better transparency last maybe let's get, let's all deciding rid of dark money.
Michael Franz: That it's unfair to have dark money it's can still spend it, because they'll spend all that money. But let's just make it all transparent, that could be a consensus one
Michael Franz: And maybe we need better regulation better monitoring better enforcement of the law federal election conditions are pretty weak body doesn't have a lot of power in we could all agree that a shed a little bit more power and that might try to prevent
Michael Franz: Some corruption and it could
Michael Franz: You know, it could it could, you know, tamp down on some of the some of the loopholes and allow money to enter the system, legally, but perhaps an ethically
Michael Franz: And so maybe we could agree on those things. But I don't know right this these seem like pretty common sensical reforms that don't limit speech too much.
Michael Franz: But I should say, I call them consensus reports with a question mark because
Michael Franz: Nothing these days is consensus is built by consensus anymore. Since we're so part of that so
Michael Franz: So there's a lot of interesting normative things to consider here as well as the nuts and bolts of campaign finance laws and so I look forward to that conversation or second lecture.
Michael Franz: And second, discussions next week to get your take, and your sense of, of what really is the the ideal way to regulate the system on what rationale, you find most
Michael Franz: Most interesting most compelling and we can talk a little bit more also about the spending in some of your campaigns. So that's it for now. Thank you for listening and I look forward to those those conversations. Have a great day.